2024-05-15 Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA (#3781)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-05-05-liberty-project-starter-guide-IntelliJ.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/Ruilin-Ma
author_github: https://github.com/Ruilin-Ma
seo-title: Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: This blog is designed to assist users in initiating their journey with the Liberty Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA. It aims to help users understand how to set up the required Liberty environment using Open Liberty Starter, navigate Maven project structures, and use Liberty tools within an IDE.
blog_description: This blog is designed to assist users in initiating their journey with the Liberty Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA. It aims to help users understand how to set up the required Liberty environment using Open Liberty Starter, navigate Maven project structures, and use Liberty tools within an IDE.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---

> = Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA
```

Reviewer: (shorter and you don't lose the key info off the end so easily when Google etc shorten the title)

Ruilin Ma <https://github.com/Ruilin-Ma>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

:figure-caption!:
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> This blog is designed to assist users in initiating their journey with the Liberty Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA. It aims to help users understand how to set up the required Liberty environment using Open Liberty Starter, navigate Maven project structures, and use Liberty tools within an IDE. Key aspects covered in this blog include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this blog post, you will be able to create a Liberty Maven project for a new cloud-native Java application by using the Open Liberty Starter, and to edit your application using the Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA:
```

* <<prerequisites, Before you start>>

> * <<libertyStarter, Creating a Liberty Maven project with the Open Liberty Starter>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<libertyStarter, Create a Liberty Maven project with the Open Liberty Starter>>
```

> * <<ImportProject, Importing the project into the IntelliJ IDEA>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<ImportProject, Import your project into IntelliJ IDEA>>
```

> * <<AboutProject, Overview of the Liberty Maven project>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<AboutProject, Explore your Liberty Maven project>>
```

> * <<libertyToolsWithDevMode, Rapid application development with Liberty Tools>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> * <<tryLibertyDevMode, Edit your app with Liberty dev mode>>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <<tryLibertyDevMode, Edit your app using Liberty dev mode>>
```

[#prerequisites]
== Before you start

=== Installing Java

> To initiate the Liberty Maven project on your end, it is necessary to install Java. It is recommended to install either Java 17 or Java 21.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install either Java 17 or Java 21. You can link:https://www.ibm.com/support/pages/semeru-runtimes-installation[download IBM Semeru Runtimes for free]. Semeru integrates well with Liberty (link:https://foojay.io/today/where-do-you-get-your-java/[find out more about Semeru and other Java distributions]).

```

> Please refer to the link for setting up Java: https://www.ibm.com/support/pages/semeru-runtimes-installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> There are multiple Java distributions; find out more in link:https://foojay.io/today/where-do-you-get-your-java/[Where do you get your Java?]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Once Java installation is completed, please ensure the `JAVA_HOME` variable have been properly config in your system path. The `JAVA_HOME` variable is essential for Maven Liberty projects. It helps to indicate which JVM to use. If the JVM is not set, the system default is used. Please locate the Java installation path on your system, and then export or set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Java installation is completed, ensure the `JAVA_HOME` variable has been properly configured in your system path. The `JAVA_HOME` variable is essential for Maven Liberty projects because it indicates which JVM to use. Locate the Java installation path on your system, and then export or set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable using the following command (Linux and Mac):
```

Reviewer: What's the equivalent on Windows?

[role='command']
```
export JAVA_HOME=<your Java installation path>
```

=== Installing Liberty Tools for IDE Enhancement

> Liberty Tools is necessary to install before proceeding with this blog. Please use the link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[link] to install Liberty Tools on IntelliJ IDEA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools is a plugin for IntelliJ IDEA that provides integrated support for Liberty applications. Liberty Tools provides tools to help you to develop, test, debug, and manage applications in IntelliJ.

To install Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA:

1. Start IntelliJ IDEA.
2. Click Plugins or open the Plugins section of the Setting dialog.
3. Search the Plugins Marketplace for `Liberty Tools`. If nothing is found, check whether you have a link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[supported version of IntelliJ IDEA].
4. Install Liberty Tools then restart the IDE.

When the IDE restarts, Liberty Tools is installed and enabled.
```

[#libertyStarter]
== Creating a Liberty Maven project with the Open Liberty Starter

> The Open Liberty Starter provides a simple way for initiating an Liberty Maven project. Visit the link:https://openliberty.io/start/[Open Liberty Starter page], define your application and project name, select a build tool (either Maven), and indicate the preferred versions of Java SE, Jakarta EE, and MicroProfile for your application. Finally, click on `Generate Project` to download your project seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Open Liberty Starter provides a simple way to create a Liberty Maven project for your Java cloud-native app. The Maven project contains all the files and project structure that you need to get starting writing your app. You can easily modify the project configuration (e.g. in the `pom.xml` and `server.xml`) to add more or different options later if necessary.

To create your project:

1. Visit the link:https://openliberty.io/start/[Open Liberty Starter].
2. Accept the default values by clicking **Generate Project** and download your project.
```

image::img/blog/liberty-starter.png[Maven dependencies example,width=60%,align="center"]

[#ImportProject]

> == Importing the project into the IntelliJ IDEA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Importing your project into IntelliJ IDEA
```

> When using IntelliJ IDEA, you can either navigate to `File` > `Open...` within the IDE or simply drag and drop the project folder into the IDE window for seamless integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you import a Liberty Maven project into IntelliJ IDEA, the Liberty Tools automatically detects the project.

To import your Liberty Maven project:

1. Extract the `app-name.zip` file that you downloaded from the Open Liberty Starter. The file extracts to a project folder called `app-name` which you can optionally move to elsewhere on your file system before continuing.
2. In the IDE, click **File > Open...**, select the project folder, then click **Open**.

Your project is imported into IntelliJ IDEA and detected by Liberty Tools.
```

[#AboutProject]
== Overview of the Liberty Maven project

=== Project structure

> A well-organized file structure is crucial for Maven projects, providing a clear framework for development. This hierarchy includes directories for application code, MicroProfile, Liberty configuration and tests.

Reviewer: After importing a project into the IDE, the Project view displays the Liberty Maven project structure, as shown in the following image:

image::img/blog/liberty-app-directory-img.png[Liberty Project directory image,width=40%,align="center"]

> Referring to the demo Maven project's structure shown in the picture: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A well-organized file structure is crucial for Maven projects, providing a clear framework for development. This hierarchy includes directories for application code, MicroProfile, Liberty configuration, and tests:
```

- `src/main/java`: Java application code files
- `src/main/liberty/config`: Liberty configuration files
- `src/main/resources/META-INF`: MicroProfile configuration files
- `src/test`: Test files
- `Dockerfile`: Dockerfile for building the Docker image

> - `mvnw`/`mvnw.cmd`: Maven Wrapper script for Unix-like/Windows systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `mvnw` or `mvnw.cmd`: Maven Wrapper script for Unix-like or Windows operating systems
```

Reviewer: The earlier items in the list use `/` to indicate folder structure and it's not always obvious that `/` means "or" so it's clearer just to write "or".

> Within the `app-name` directory, the `pom.xml` file containing configuration details for the project, encompassing dependencies, plugins, and other settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `app-name` directory, the `pom.xml` file contains configuration details for the project, including dependencies, plugins, and other settings.
```

=== Declaring dependencies

> Maven manage the project through the Maven configuration `pom.xml` file. To declare dependencies, `<dependencies>` section should be used. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to add any Liberty features (e.g. JPA support) to your app, you need to update the Maven project configuration in the `pom.xml`.

To declare dependencies, edit the `<dependencies>` section of the `pom.xml`. For example:
```

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, xml]
```

----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>jakarta.platform</groupId>
        <artifactId>jakarta.jakartaee-api</artifactId>
        <version>10.0.0</version>
        <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

> In this example, the `jakarta.jakartaee-api` from `jakarta.platform` has been introduced as a dependency for this project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `jakarta.jakartaee-api` API from the `jakarta.platform` package has been introduced as a dependency for this project. 
```
(Is "package" the right term here?)

Author: Thank you for the suggestion, according to [Naming Conventions](https://maven.apache.org/guides/mini/guide-naming-conventions.html) on maven.apache.org, the `groupId` `jakarta.platform` is used to identify the Jakarta EE project across all projects. The `package` usually refers to the root Java package containing all generated source codes, I think it might makes more sense to consider this `groupId` as an identifier for the project. Perhaps we may consider using `jakarta.platform` project? Please let me know what you think :)

Reviewer: Yes, that makes sense.

> For adding or updating dependencies in a Maven project, you can visit the link:https://mvnrepository.com/[Maven Library] for more information.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is a specific enough link to be useful here. Is the intention to provide help on how to add/update dependencies? Or to provide a list of potentially useful dependencies to add (in which case you should probably find and filter the list to something useful)?

Author: Yes, I added this link here to show that the most of the Maven dependencies info & versions can be found using the Maven Library. Users may use this tool as a dependencies search engine. I agree with the suggestion that providing a list of potentially useful dependencies here. Do you think it might be more helpful to include the [top dependencies categories](https://mvnrepository.com/open-source) instead?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add more dependencies, as needed, to your Maven project, from the link:https://mvnrepository.com/open-source/[Maven Library].
```

Does this make sense?

Author: Yes, thank you :)

> === Adding plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Adding Maven plugins

Like IntelliJ IDEA (and many other development tools), you can enhance the functionality of Maven by adding Maven plugins that provide additional capabilities. Maven plugins that are commonly used include those for compiling code, running tests, and packaging application.

The Liberty Maven Plugin is a Maven plugin that the Open Liberty Starter configured in your Liberty Maven project. The Liberty Maven Plugin provides several goals for managing a Liberty runtime, including tasks such as downloading and installing the Liberty runtime, starting or stopping a Liberty server in development mode, installing features, and deploying applications.

You can see where the Liberty Maven Plugin is configured in your Liberty Maven project in the `pluginManagement` section of the `pom.xml`:
```

I tweaked the ordering here because the use of "plugin" is overloaded and it took me a moment to realise we were talking about Maven rather than IDE plugins here.

> Plugins enhance the functionality of Maven by providing additional capabilities. Common plugins encompass tasks such as compiling code, running tests, packaging applications, and more. For instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, xml]
```

----
<pluginManagement>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
            <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>3.10.2</version>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</pluginManagement>
----

//explain lmp here

> In this example, the `liberty-maven-plugin` from `io.openliberty.tools` has been introduced as a plugin for this project. The Liberty Maven Plugin offers several goals for managing a Liberty runtime, including tasks such as downloading and installing the Liberty runtime, starting or stopping a Liberty server in development mode, installing features, and deploying applications. Please visit link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven/blob/main/README.md[Liberty Maven Plugin Document] for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `liberty-maven-plugin` from `io.openliberty.tools` has been added to this project. 

For more information about the Liberty Maven Plugin, see the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven/blob/main/README.md[Liberty Maven Plugin docs].
```

[#libertyToolsWithDevMode]

> == Rapid application development with Liberty Tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Efficiently edit your application with Liberty dev mode
```

> === Introducing Liberty Tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Liberty Tools enhances the application development experience with Open Liberty by providing convenient features. It includes a Liberty Dashboard for organizing projects and integrates Liberty dev mode directly into your IDE. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools enhances the application development experience with Open Liberty by providing convenient features, which include the Liberty Dashboard for organizing projects and Liberty dev mode integrated directly into your IDE. 
```

> The Liberty Dashboard effectively manages Maven projects, seamlessly integrating configurations for Open Liberty. Moreover, it facilitates rapid development of MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications by offering automatic code blocks, auto-complete functionality, and real-time syntax validation. With just a few clicks, you can start or stop your app, run tests, and check reports. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Liberty Dashboard effectively manages Maven projects, seamlessly integrating configurations for Open Liberty. It facilitates rapid development of MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications by offering automatic code blocks, auto-complete functionality, and real-time syntax validation. With just a few clicks, you can start or stop your app, run tests, and check reports. 
```

> Furthermore, Liberty dev mode can swiftly apply code changes to your running app without needing to restart the server, ensuring faster development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liberty dev mode can swiftly apply code changes to your running app without needing to restart the server, ensuring faster development.
```

> You may opt to use Liberty Tools for enhanced convenience:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click the Open Liberty logo on the right-side of the IDE window to open the Liberty tool window, which provides a set of actions to help you to manage your app (e.g. starting and stopping the Liberty runtime instance):
```

image::img/blog/Liberty-Tools-Example.png[Liberty Tools Example image, title="An example integrating Liberty Dashboard from Liberty Tools into a Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA", width=30%,align="center"]

> Liberty Tools offer three methods to assist you in starting your Liberty application in development mode: Start, Start with configuration, or Start in a container. To start your application in dev mode, click the `Start` action for your application in the Liberty Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools offer three ways of starting your Liberty application in dev mode: Start, Start with configuration, or Start in a container.

For now, click the **Start** action to simply start your application in dev mode.
```

To effectively use the Liberty Tools for Liberty dev mode and other Liberty dashboard option, consulting the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/liberty-tools-intellij/blob/main/docs/user-guide.md#run-your-application-on-liberty-using-dev-mode[user guide provided with IntelliJ IDEA] is recommended. For more information about liberty development mode and container support for development mode, please visit the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/development-mode.html[dev mode document].

You can also visit articles on IBM Developers for More information about Liberty Tools: link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/awb-effective-cloud-native-development-open-liberty-intellij-idea/[Effective cloud-native Java app development with Open Liberty in IntelliJ IDEA]

> Additionally, you can use the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Although you can use dev mode on the cmd line, I think we should stick with the IDE here.

> Open a command line session, navigate to the installation directory, and run the following command 
> 
> [role='command']
> ```
> ./mvnw liberty:dev
> ```
> 
> This will install all required dependencies and start the default server in dev mode. If successful, you will see the necessary features installed and the following messages:
> 
> [role='no_copy']
> ```
> [INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKF0012I: The server installed the following features: [appAuthentication-3.0, appAuthorization-2.1, appClientSupport-2.0, appSecurity-5.0, batch-2.1, beanValidation-3.0, cdi-4.0, concurrent-3.0, connectors-2.1, distributedMap-1.0, enterpriseBeans-4.0, enterpriseBeansHome-4.0, enterpriseBeansLite-4.0, enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer-4.0 ... ].
> [INFO] [AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 6.514 seconds.
> ...           
> [INFO] ************************************************************************
> [INFO] *    Liberty is running in dev mode.
> ...
> [INFO] ************************************************************************
> [INFO] Source compilation was successful.
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [#tryLibertyDevMode]
> == Edit your app with Liberty dev mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Dev mode can automatically detect, recompile, and deploy code changes whenever you save a new change in your IDE or text editor. To try out this feature, an example of creating a simple REST Resource Java File is provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dev mode automatically detects, recompiles, and deploys code changes whenever you save a new change in your IDE or text editor. Try the following example of creating a simple REST resource Java file:
```

> Please check out the project and ensure that Liberty dev mode is running. Then, create a new Java class file named `HelloWorldResource.java` as the REST resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that Liberty dev mode is running, then create the following Java class file named `HelloWorldResource.java` as the REST resource:
```

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source, java]
```

> ```
> src/main/java/com/demo/rest/HelloWorldResource.java
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
src/main/java/com/demo/rest/HelloWorldResource.java
----
```

> and paste following code into the file: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste the following code into the file: 
```

[source,java]
```
package com.demo.rest;

import jakarta.ws.rs.GET;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Path;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Produces;
import jakarta.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class HelloWorldResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String helloWorld() {
        return "Hello, World!";
    }
}
```

> Once the console displays `Web application available`, it indicates that the Liberty server has successfully detected, recompiled and deployed the changes. You can now view the message drafted in the example by accessing the link: http://localhost:9080/app-name/api/hello

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the console displays `Web application available`, the Liberty server has successfully detected, recompiled, and deployed the changes. You can now view the message drafted in the example by accessing the link: http://localhost:9080/app-name/api/hello
```
Could you show a screenshot of the console showing something like this here?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/development-mode.html[Open Liberty dev mode docs]
* link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/awb-effective-cloud-native-development-open-liberty-intellij-idea/[Effective cloud-native Java app development with Open Liberty in IntelliJ IDEA]
```

> == Next Steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Next steps
```

> Visit our guides to learn more about Open Liberty
> 
> - Check out link:https://openliberty.io/guides/getting-started.html[the Getting started with Open Liberty guide]
> - Check out link:https://openliberty.io/guides/rest-intro.html[the Creating a RESTful web service guide]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more about Open Liberty with our link:https://openliberty.io/guides/getting-started.html[Getting started with Open Liberty guide]
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Developing a cloud-native Java application with the Liberty Starter, Liberty Tools, and IntelliJ IDEA"
```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/Ruilin-Ma
author_github: https://github.com/Ruilin-Ma

> seo-title: Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty using Liberty Starter and Liberty Tools within IntelliJ IDEA - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
seo-title: Developing a cloud-native Java application with the Liberty Starter, Liberty Tools, and IntelliJ IDEA - OpenLiberty.io
```

> seo-description: This blog is designed to assist users in initiating their journey with the Liberty Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA. It aims to help users understand how to set up the required Liberty environment using Open Liberty Starter, navigate Maven project structures, and use Liberty tools within an IDE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
seo-description: Learn how to create a Liberty Maven project for a new cloud-native Java application by using the Open Liberty Starter, and to edit your application using the Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA.
```

> blog_description: This blog is designed to assist users in initiating their journey with the Liberty Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA. It aims to help users understand how to set up the required Liberty environment using Open Liberty Starter, navigate Maven project structures, and use Liberty tools within an IDE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
blog_description: Learn how to create a Liberty Maven project for a new cloud-native Java application by using the Open Liberty Starter, and to edit your application using the Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA.
```

> open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/blog/liberty-starter.png
```

> open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty starter
```

---

> = Developing a new cloud-native Java application with Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Developing a cloud-native Java application with Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA
```

Ruilin Ma <https://github.com/Ruilin-Ma>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

:figure-caption!:
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> By the end of this blog post, you will be able to create a Liberty Maven project for a new cloud-native Java application by using the Open Liberty Starter, and to edit your application using the Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Learn how to create a Liberty Maven project for a new cloud-native Java application by using the Open Liberty Starter, and to edit your application using the Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA.
```

* <<prerequisites, Before you start>>
* <<libertyStarter, Create a Liberty Maven project with the Open Liberty Starter>>
* <<ImportProject, Import your project into IntelliJ IDEA>>
* <<AboutProject, Explore your Liberty Maven project>>

> * <<tryLibertyDevMode, Edit your app using Liberty dev mode>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<libertyToolsWithDevMode, Edit your app using Liberty dev mode>>
```

[#prerequisites]
== Before you start

=== Installing Java

> Install either Java 17 or Java 21. You can link:https://www.ibm.com/support/pages/semeru-runtimes-installation[download IBM Semeru Runtimes for free]. Semeru integrates well with Liberty (link:https://foojay.io/today/where-do-you-get-your-java/[find out more about Semeru and other Java distributions]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install either Java 17 or Java 21. You can link:https://www.ibm.com/support/pages/semeru-runtimes-installation[download IBM Semeru Runtimes for free]. Semeru integrates well with Liberty, but you can find out more about Semeru and other Java distributionslink:https://foojay.io/today/where-do-you-get-your-java/[in this article].
```

> When the Java installation is completed, ensure the `JAVA_HOME` variable has been properly configured in your system path. The `JAVA_HOME` variable is essential for Maven Liberty projects because it indicates which JVM to use. Locate the Java installation path on your system, and then export or set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable using the following command (Linux and Mac):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the Java installation is complete, ensure the `JAVA_HOME` variable is properly configured in your system path. The `JAVA_HOME` variable is essential for Maven Liberty projects because it indicates which JVM to use. Locate the Java installation path on your system, and then export or set the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable using the following command (Linux and Mac):
```

[role='command']
```
export JAVA_HOME=<your Java installation path>
```

> === Installing Liberty Tools for IDE Enhancement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Installing Liberty Tools for IntelliJ IDEA
```

> Liberty Tools is a plugin for IntelliJ IDEA that provides integrated support for Liberty applications. Liberty Tools provides tools to help you to develop, test, debug, and manage applications in IntelliJ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools is a plugin for IntelliJ IDEA that helps you develop, test, debug, and manage Liberty applications in IntelliJ.
```

To install Liberty Tools in IntelliJ IDEA:

1. Start IntelliJ IDEA.

> 2. Click Plugins or open the Plugins section of the Setting dialog.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click **Plugins** or open the **Plugins** section of the **Settings** window.
```

3. Search the Plugins Marketplace for `Liberty Tools`. If nothing is found, check whether you have a link:https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14856-liberty-tools[supported version of IntelliJ IDEA].
4. Install Liberty Tools then restart the IDE.

When the IDE restarts, Liberty Tools is installed and enabled.

[#libertyStarter]
== Creating a Liberty Maven project with the Open Liberty Starter

> The Open Liberty Starter provides a simple way to create a Liberty Maven project for your Java cloud-native app. The Maven project contains all the files and project structure that you need to get starting writing your app. You can easily modify the project configuration (e.g. in the `pom.xml` and `server.xml`) to add more or different options later if necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Open Liberty Starter provides a simple way to create a Liberty Maven project. This Maven project contains all the files and project structure that you need to get started writing your cloud-native Java app. You can easily modify the project configuration in the `pom.xml` and `server.xml` files to add more or different options later, if necessary.
```

To create your project:

1. Visit the link:https://openliberty.io/start/[Open Liberty Starter].
2. Accept the default values by clicking **Generate Project** and download your project.

image::img/blog/liberty-starter.png[Maven dependencies example,width=60%,align="center"]

[#ImportProject]
== Importing your project into IntelliJ IDEA

> When you import a Liberty Maven project into IntelliJ IDEA, the Liberty Tools automatically detects the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you import a Liberty Maven project into IntelliJ IDEA, Liberty Tools automatically detects the project.
```

To import your Liberty Maven project:

> 1. Extract the `app-name.zip` file that you downloaded from the Open Liberty Starter. The file extracts to a project folder called `app-name` which you can optionally move to elsewhere on your file system before continuing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Extract the `app-name.zip` file that you downloaded from the Open Liberty Starter. The file extracts to a project folder called `app-name`, which you can optionally move elsewhere on your file system before you continue.
```

2. In the IDE, click **File > Open...**, select the project folder, then click **Open**.

Your project is imported into IntelliJ IDEA and detected by Liberty Tools.

[#AboutProject]
== Overview of the Liberty Maven project

=== Project structure

After importing a project into the IDE, the Project view displays the Liberty Maven project structure, as shown in the following image:

image::img/blog/liberty-app-directory-img.png[Liberty Project directory image,width=40%,align="center"]

> A well-organized file structure is crucial for Maven projects, providing a clear framework for development. This hierarchy includes directories for application code, MicroProfile, Liberty configuration, and tests:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A well-organized file structure is crucial for Maven projects, providing a clear framework for development. This hierarchy includes directories for application code, MicroProfile and Liberty configuration files, and tests:
```

- `src/main/java`: Java application code files
- `src/main/liberty/config`: Liberty configuration files
- `src/main/resources/META-INF`: MicroProfile configuration files
- `src/test`: Test files
- `Dockerfile`: Dockerfile for building the Docker image
- `mvnw` or `mvnw.cmd`: Maven Wrapper script for Unix-like or Windows operating systems

In the `app-name` directory, the `pom.xml` file contains configuration details for the project, including dependencies, plugins, and other settings.

=== Declaring dependencies

> If you need to add any Liberty features (e.g. JPA support) to your app, you need to update the Maven project configuration in the `pom.xml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you need to add any Liberty features to your app (such as JPA support), update the Maven project configuration in the `pom.xml` file.
```

> To declare dependencies, edit the `<dependencies>` section of the `pom.xml`. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To declare dependencies, edit the `<dependencies>` section of the `pom.xml` file, as shown in the following example:
```

[source, xml]
----
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>jakarta.platform</groupId>
        <artifactId>jakarta.jakartaee-api</artifactId>
        <version>10.0.0</version>
        <scope>provided</scope>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
----

> In this example, the `jakarta.jakartaee-api` API from the `jakarta.platform` project has been introduced as a dependency for this project. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `jakarta.jakartaee-api` API from the `jakarta.platform` project is introduced as a dependency for this project. 
```

> You can add more dependencies, as needed, to your Maven project, from the link:https://mvnrepository.com/open-source/[Maven Library].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can add more dependencies to your Maven project from the link:https://mvnrepository.com/open-source/[Maven Library].
```

=== Adding Maven plugins

> Like IntelliJ IDEA (and many other development tools), you can enhance the functionality of Maven by adding Maven plugins that provide additional capabilities. Maven plugins that are commonly used include those for compiling code, running tests, and packaging application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In IntelliJ IDEA , like many other development tools, you can enhance the functionality of Maven by adding Maven plugins. Maven plugins are commonly used for compiling code, running tests, and packaging applications.
```

> The Liberty Maven Plugin is a Maven plugin that the Open Liberty Starter configured in your Liberty Maven project. The Liberty Maven Plugin provides several goals for managing a Liberty runtime, including tasks such as downloading and installing the Liberty runtime, starting or stopping a Liberty server in development mode, installing features, and deploying applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Open Liberty Starter configures the Liberty Maven Plugin in your Maven project by default. The Liberty Maven Plugin provides several goals for managing a Liberty runtime, including tasks such as downloading and installing the Liberty runtime, starting or stopping a Liberty server in development mode, installing features, and deploying applications.
```

You can see where the Liberty Maven Plugin is configured in your Liberty Maven project in the `pluginManagement` section of the `pom.xml`:

[source, xml]
----
<pluginManagement>
    <plugins>
        <plugin>
            <groupId>io.openliberty.tools</groupId>
            <artifactId>liberty-maven-plugin</artifactId>
            <version>3.10.2</version>
        </plugin>
    </plugins>
</pluginManagement>
----

//explain lmp here

> In this example, the `liberty-maven-plugin` from `io.openliberty.tools` has been added to this project. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the `liberty-maven-plugin` from `io.openliberty.tools` is added to this project. 
```

> For more information about the Liberty Maven Plugin, see the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven/blob/main/README.md[Liberty Maven Plugin docs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.maven/blob/main/README.md[Liberty Maven Plugin docs].
```

[#libertyToolsWithDevMode]
== Efficiently edit your application with Liberty dev mode

> Liberty Tools enhances the application development experience with Open Liberty by providing convenient features, which include the Liberty Dashboard for organizing projects and Liberty dev mode integrated directly into your IDE. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools enhances the application development experience with Open Liberty by providing convenient features that are  integrated directly into your IDE, including the Liberty Dashboard and Liberty dev mode. 
```

The Liberty Dashboard effectively manages Maven projects, seamlessly integrating configurations for Open Liberty. It facilitates rapid development of MicroProfile and Jakarta EE applications by offering automatic code blocks, auto-complete functionality, and real-time syntax validation. With just a few clicks, you can start or stop your app, run tests, and check reports. 

Liberty dev mode can swiftly apply code changes to your running app without needing to restart the server, ensuring faster development.

> Click the Open Liberty logo on the right-side of the IDE window to open the Liberty tool window, which provides a set of actions to help you to manage your app (e.g. starting and stopping the Liberty runtime instance):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Click the Open Liberty logo in the IDE window to open the Liberty tool window, which provides a set of actions to help you to manage your app (e.g. starting and stopping the Liberty runtime instance):
```

image::img/blog/Liberty-Tools-Example.png[Liberty Tools Example image, title="An example integrating Liberty Dashboard from Liberty Tools into a Maven project with IntelliJ IDEA", width=30%,align="center"]

> Liberty Tools offer three ways of starting your Liberty application in dev mode: Start, Start with configuration, or Start in a container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Liberty Tools offer three ways to start your Liberty application in dev mode: Start, Start with configuration, or Start in a container.
```

For now, click the **Start** action to simply start your application in dev mode.

> To effectively use the Liberty Tools for Liberty dev mode and other Liberty dashboard option, consulting the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/liberty-tools-intellij/blob/main/docs/user-guide.md#run-your-application-on-liberty-using-dev-mode[user guide provided with IntelliJ IDEA] is recommended. For more information about liberty development mode and container support for development mode, please visit the link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/development-mode.html[dev mode document].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> You can also visit articles on IBM Developers for More information about Liberty Tools: link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/awb-effective-cloud-native-development-open-liberty-intellij-idea/[Effective cloud-native Java app development with Open Liberty in IntelliJ IDEA]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Dev mode automatically detects, recompiles, and deploys code changes whenever you save a new change in your IDE or text editor. Try the following example of creating a simple REST resource Java file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dev mode automatically detects, recompiles, and deploys code changes whenever you save a new change in your IDE or text editor. The following example creates a simple REST resource Java file.
```

Ensure that Liberty dev mode is running, then create the following Java class file named `HelloWorldResource.java` as the REST resource:

[source, java]
----
src/main/java/com/demo/rest/HelloWorldResource.java
----

Paste the following code into the file: 

[source,java]
```
package com.demo.rest;

import jakarta.ws.rs.GET;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Path;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Produces;
import jakarta.ws.rs.core.MediaType;

@Path("/hello")
public class HelloWorldResource {

    @GET
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String helloWorld() {
        return "Hello, World!";
    }
}
```

When the console displays `Web application available`, the Liberty server has successfully detected, recompiled, and deployed the changes. You can now view the message drafted in the example by accessing the link: http://localhost:9080/app-name/api/hello

For more information, see:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/development-mode.html[Open Liberty dev mode docs]
* link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/awb-effective-cloud-native-development-open-liberty-intellij-idea/[Effective cloud-native Java app development with Open Liberty in IntelliJ IDEA]

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/liberty-tools-intellij/blob/main/docs/user-guide.md#run-your-application-on-liberty-using-dev-mode[Liberty Tools for IntelliJ IDEA user guide]
```
